README.md, before:

# RamSleuth - RAM SPD Inspector and Die Identifier

RamSleuth is a non-destructive memory analysis tool that reads SPD (Serial Presence Detect) data from RAM modules to identify DRAM die types and provide detailed hardware information. Built around the industry-standard `decode-dimms` tool, it offers both command-line and interactive TUI interfaces for analyzing memory modules.

![RamSleuth TUI Interface](Doc/Screenshot.png)

## Overview

### What RamSleuth Does

RamSleuth safely inspects your computer's RAM modules to answer key questions:
- What DRAM die type is used in each memory module?
- What are the specifications and capabilities of your RAM?
- Are your modules running at their rated speeds?
- What are the detailed SPD timings and voltages?

The tool reads SPD data from hardware, parses it through `decode-dimms`, and applies a curated heuristic database to identify DRAM die manufacturers and types. It supports DDR3, DDR4, and DDR5 memory modules from major vendors including Samsung, SK Hynix, Micron, Corsair, G.Skill, and Crucial.

### Key Features

- **DRAM Die Detection**: Identifies memory die types using a comprehensive heuristic database
- **Multiple Output Modes**: Summary, detailed, JSON, and interactive TUI views
- **Interactive TUI**: Text-based interface with theme support and keyboard navigation
- **Persistent Configuration**: Remembers your preferences across sessions
- **Automatic Dependency Management**: Detects and helps install required tools
- **Safe Operation**: Non-destructive, read-only analysis with no hardware modification
- **Cross-Distribution Support**: Works on 15+ Linux distributions with native package management

### Quick Start

```bash
# Clone and run (requires root for hardware access)
git clone <repository-url>
cd RamSleuth
sudo python ramsleuth.py

# Or use specific modes
sudo python ramsleuth.py --summary    # Concise one-line per DIMM
sudo python ramsleuth.py --full       # Detailed view with raw SPD data
sudo python ramsleuth.py --json       # Machine-readable JSON output
sudo python ramsleuth.py --tui        # Interactive TUI interface
```

### Usage Examples

**Default Mode** (interactive TUI if available):
```bash
sudo python ramsleuth.py
```

**Summary Mode** (scripting friendly):
```bash
sudo python ramsleuth.py --summary
# Output: DIMM_A1: DDR4 16GB Corsair CMK16GX4M2B3200C16 -> Samsung B-die
```

**JSON Mode** (automation):
```bash
sudo python ramsleuth.py --json > memory_report.json
```

**Test Data Mode** (validation without hardware):
```bash
python ramsleuth.py --test-data
```

### Theme Usage

The TUI supports theme persistence with two methods:

**Ctrl+T**: Toggle between dark and light themes instantly. Your preference is saved immediately.

**Ctrl+P**: Open the command palette (requires Textual 0.20.0+) and type "dark" or "light" to select.

Configuration is stored at `~/.config/ramsleuth/ramsleuth_config.json` and works correctly when running with `sudo` (saves to your user directory, not root's).

### System Requirements

- **Python**: 3.8 or newer
- **Permissions**: Root access (or equivalent) for SPD hardware access
- **Dependencies**: 
  - `i2c-tools` (provides `i2cdetect` and `decode-dimms`)
  - `dmidecode`
  - `python-textual` (optional, for TUI mode)
  - `python-linkify-it-py` (optional, for TUI help)

RamSleuth will detect missing dependencies and offer to install them using your system's native package manager (apt, pacman, dnf, etc.).

---

## Technical Details

### Architecture

RamSleuth is built with a modular architecture separating concerns for maintainability and testability:

**Core Components:**
- `ramsleuth.py`: Main orchestrator handling CLI/TUI, hardware discovery, and output formatting
- `RamSleuth_DB.py`: Pure heuristic engine for die type identification
- `settings_service.py`: Centralized configuration management with XDG compliance
- `dependency_engine.py`: System-native dependency detection and installation
- `die_database.json`: Curated heuristic rules database

**Execution Flow:**
1. Environment validation (root check, dependency detection)
2. Hardware discovery (SMBus/I2C bus scanning)
3. SPD data collection via `decode-dimms`
4. Data parsing and normalization
5. Heuristic matching against die database
6. Output formatting based on selected mode

### Configuration Management

The `SettingsService` class provides centralized configuration management:

- **XDG Base Directory Compliance**: Config stored at `~/.config/ramsleuth/`
- **Sudo Awareness**: When run with sudo, uses original user's home directory
- **Automatic Ownership Management**: Recursive chown ensures proper file permissions
- **Validation**: Built-in validation for all settings with clear error handling
- **Persistence**: Immediate save on change, not deferred until exit

**Configuration API:**
```python
from settings_service import SettingsService

settings = SettingsService(debug=True)
theme = settings.get_setting("theme", "dark")
settings.set_setting("theme", "light")
```

### Dependency Engine

The dependency engine provides autonomous package management across 15+ Linux distributions:

**Supported Distributions:**
- Arch Linux, Artix, EndeavourOS, Manjaro
- Debian, Ubuntu, Linux Mint, Pop!_OS
- Fedora, RHEL, CentOS, Rocky Linux, AlmaLinux
- openSUSE (Leap and Tumbleweed)
- Gentoo

**Behavior:**
- Detects distribution and appropriate package manager automatically
- Checks for missing core tools (`i2cdetect`, `decode-dimms`, `dmidecode`)
- Checks for optional Python packages (`textual`, `linkify-it-py`)
- In interactive mode, asks permission before installing anything
- Constructs and executes correct installation commands for each distribution
- Never installs packages without explicit user approval

### TUI Implementation

The Textual-based TUI provides an interactive interface with several advanced features:

**Widget Architecture:**
- `DataTable`: DIMM list with sortable columns and keyboard navigation
- `RichLog`: Enhanced text panes supporting line selection and copying
- `Tabs`: Switch between Summary and Full views
- `CommandPalette`: Theme switching and future extensibility

**Key Features:**
- **Dual Theme Methods**: Both Ctrl+T toggle and Ctrl+P command palette
- **Focus Management**: Tab key switches between DIMM list and detail panes
- **Persistent State**: Active tab and theme preferences saved automatically
- **Rich Text Support**: Full Rich markup for formatted output
- **Keyboard Navigation**: Vim-style keys (j/k) and arrow keys

**Enhanced TUI Widgets:**
Recent enhancements replaced `Static` widgets with `RichLog` to support:
- Line-by-line keyboard navigation within detail panes
- Mouse text selection for copying to clipboard
- Visual focus indicators
- Improved scrolling performance

### Heuristic Database

The `die_database.json` contains prioritized rules for DRAM die identification:

**Rule Structure:**
```json
{
  "priority": 100,
  "die_type": "Samsung B-die",
  "generation": "DDR4",
  "manufacturer": "corsair",
  "part_number_contains": "CMK",
  "timings_xmp": "3200-16-18-18"
}
```

**Matching Logic:**
- Rules evaluated in priority order (highest first)
- All constraints must match (logical AND)
- Supports substring, exact, and prefix matching
- Handles sticker codes and IC part numbers for enhanced detection

### Interactive Features

**Lootbox/Sticker Prompts:**
In interactive mode, RamSleuth can prompt for additional information to improve detection accuracy:

- **Corsair**: "Ver X.XX" version codes from module labels
- **G.Skill**: Small alphanumeric sticker codes on heatspreaders
- **Crucial**: Suffix codes like ".M8FE1" from BL2K16G36C16U4B kits
- **SK Hynix**: IC part numbers from DDR5 DRAM packages

These prompts only appear in interactive TUI mode and are never shown in non-interactive modes (`--summary`, `--full`, `--json`).

### Debug Mode

Enable debug logging to troubleshoot issues:

```bash
sudo python ramsleuth.py --debug
```

Debug output includes:
- Configuration file operations and path resolution
- Hardware discovery details (SMBus scanning, device registration)
- Parser decision logic and intermediate data
- Theme change events and state management
- Dependency detection and installation steps

### Test Mode

Use test data for validation without hardware:

```bash
python ramsleuth.py --test-data
```

This mode uses the included `test_data.txt` fixture to demonstrate parsing and heuristic matching without requiring actual hardware access.

### Development

**Setup:**
```bash
python -m venv .venv
. .venv/bin/activate
pip install pytest textual
```

**Run Tests:**
```bash
PYTHONPATH=. pytest -q
```

**Test Coverage:**
- `test_parse_output.py`: Parser validation with side-by-side fixtures
- `test_RamSleuth_DB_is_match.py`: Heuristic matching logic
- `test_settings_service.py`: Configuration management
- `test_dependency_engine.py`: Dependency detection across distributions
- `test_command_palette.py`: TUI command palette functionality
- `test_theme_persistence.py`: Theme saving and loading

### Safety and Security

**Design Principles:**
- **Read-Only Operation**: Never modifies hardware or firmware
- **Best-Effort Registration**: SPD EEPROM registration via sysfs is non-fatal
- **Explicit User Consent**: No automatic package installation without permission
- **Input Validation**: All user input sanitized to prevent injection
- **Error Isolation**: Failures in one module don't crash the entire application
- **Clear Error Messages**: Human-readable errors with actionable guidance

**Sysfs Registration:**
When run as root, RamSleuth may attempt to register SPD EEPROM devices via `/sys/bus/i2c/devices/i2c-*/new_device`. These operations are:
- Best-effort only (failures don't stop execution)
- Non-destructive (no data modification)
- Debug-logged only (not shown to users unless `--debug` is used)
- Appropriate for DDR4/DDR5 SPD EEPROMs using the `ee1004` driver

### Exit Codes

RamSleuth uses specific exit codes for different scenarios:
- `0`: Success
- `1`: Insufficient privileges (not root)
- `4`: Database error (missing or invalid `die_database.json`)
- `5`: Dependency installation failure
- `6`: No SMBus detected in non-interactive mode
- `8`: Decoder execution failure or test data not found

---

## Feedback and Contributions

I welcome feedback, suggestions, and contributions from the community:

- **Questions or Issues**: Open an issue on the repository
- **Feature Requests**: Share your ideas for improvements
- **Database Contributions**: Help expand the die detection database
- **Code Contributions**: Submit pull requests for bug fixes or enhancements
- **Documentation**: Help improve documentation and examples

If RamSleuth has been helpful for your memory analysis needs, please consider starring the repository to help others discover it.

### Contributing Guidelines

- Keep `ramsleuth.py` as the orchestrator (environment checks, I/O, CLI/TUI)
- Keep `RamSleuth_DB.py` pure (no printing, no exits, deterministic only)
- Include tests for parsing changes in `tests/test_parse_output.py`
- Include tests for heuristic changes in `tests/test_RamSleuth_DB_is_match.py`
- Follow existing patterns and maintain non-interactive compatibility
- Never implement automatic package installation without user approval

---

## License

Refer to the LICENSE file in the repository for licensing information. External tools (`decode-dimms`, `i2c-tools`, `dmidecode`) are separate projects with their own licenses.

Commit message:

Update README with donation information

README.md, after:

# RamSleuth - RAM SPD Inspector and Die Identifier

RamSleuth is a non-destructive memory analysis tool that reads SPD (Serial Presence Detect) data from RAM modules to identify DRAM die types and provide detailed hardware information. Built around the industry-standard `decode-dimms` tool, it offers both command-line and interactive TUI interfaces for analyzing memory modules.

![RamSleuth TUI Interface](Doc/Screenshot.png)

## Overview

### What RamSleuth Does

RamSleuth safely inspects your computer's RAM modules to answer key questions:
- What DRAM die type is used in each memory module?
- What are the specifications and capabilities of your RAM?
- Are your modules running at their rated speeds?
- What are the detailed SPD timings and voltages?

The tool reads SPD data from hardware, parses it through `decode-dimms`, and applies a curated heuristic database to identify DRAM die manufacturers and types. It supports DDR3, DDR4, and DDR5 memory modules from major vendors including Samsung, SK Hynix, Micron, Corsair, G.Skill, and Crucial.

### Key Features

- **DRAM Die Detection**: Identifies memory die types using a comprehensive heuristic database
- **Multiple Output Modes**: Summary, detailed, JSON, and interactive TUI views
- **Interactive TUI**: Text-based interface with theme support and keyboard navigation
- **Persistent Configuration**: Remembers your preferences across sessions
- **Automatic Dependency Management**: Detects and helps install required tools
- **Safe Operation**: Non-destructive, read-only analysis with no hardware modification
- **Cross-Distribution Support**: Works on 15+ Linux distributions with native package management

### Quick Start

```bash
# Clone and run (requires root for hardware access)
git clone <repository-url>
cd RamSleuth
sudo python ramsleuth.py

# Or use specific modes
sudo python ramsleuth.py --summary    # Concise one-line per DIMM
sudo python ramsleuth.py --full       # Detailed view with raw SPD data
sudo python ramsleuth.py --json       # Machine-readable JSON output
sudo python ramsleuth.py --tui        # Interactive TUI interface
```

### Usage Examples

**Default Mode** (interactive TUI if available):
```bash
sudo python ramsleuth.py
```

**Summary Mode** (scripting friendly):
```bash
sudo python ramsleuth.py --summary
# Output: DIMM_A1: DDR4 16GB Corsair CMK16GX4M2B3200C16 -> Samsung B-die
```

**JSON Mode** (automation):
```bash
sudo python ramsleuth.py --json > memory_report.json
```

**Test Data Mode** (validation without hardware):
```bash
python ramsleuth.py --test-data
```

### Theme Usage

The TUI supports theme persistence with two methods:

**Ctrl+T**: Toggle between dark and light themes instantly. Your preference is saved immediately.

**Ctrl+P**: Open the command palette (requires Textual 0.20.0+) and type "dark" or "light" to select.

Configuration is stored at `~/.config/ramsleuth/ramsleuth_config.json` and works correctly when running with `sudo` (saves to your user directory, not root's).

### System Requirements

- **Python**: 3.8 or newer
- **Permissions**: Root access (or equivalent) for SPD hardware access
- **Dependencies**: 
  - `i2c-tools` (provides `i2cdetect` and `decode-dimms`)
  - `dmidecode`
  - `python-textual` (optional, for TUI mode)
  - `python-linkify-it-py` (optional, for TUI help)

RamSleuth will detect missing dependencies and offer to install them using your system's native package manager (apt, pacman, dnf, etc.).

---

## Technical Details

### Architecture

RamSleuth is built with a modular architecture separating concerns for maintainability and testability:

**Core Components:**
- `ramsleuth.py`: Main orchestrator handling CLI/TUI, hardware discovery, and output formatting
- `RamSleuth_DB.py`: Pure heuristic engine for die type identification
- `settings_service.py`: Centralized configuration management with XDG compliance
- `dependency_engine.py`: System-native dependency detection and installation
- `die_database.json`: Curated heuristic rules database

**Execution Flow:**
1. Environment validation (root check, dependency detection)
2. Hardware discovery (SMBus/I2C bus scanning)
3. SPD data collection via `decode-dimms`
4. Data parsing and normalization
5. Heuristic matching against die database
6. Output formatting based on selected mode

### Configuration Management

The `SettingsService` class provides centralized configuration management:

- **XDG Base Directory Compliance**: Config stored at `~/.config/ramsleuth/`
- **Sudo Awareness**: When run with sudo, uses original user's home directory
- **Automatic Ownership Management**: Recursive chown ensures proper file permissions
- **Validation**: Built-in validation for all settings with clear error handling
- **Persistence**: Immediate save on change, not deferred until exit

**Configuration API:**
```python
from settings_service import SettingsService

settings = SettingsService(debug=True)
theme = settings.get_setting("theme", "dark")
settings.set_setting("theme", "light")
```

### Dependency Engine

The dependency engine provides autonomous package management across 15+ Linux distributions:

**Supported Distributions:**
- Arch Linux, Artix, EndeavourOS, Manjaro
- Debian, Ubuntu, Linux Mint, Pop!_OS
- Fedora, RHEL, CentOS, Rocky Linux, AlmaLinux
- openSUSE (Leap and Tumbleweed)
- Gentoo

**Behavior:**
- Detects distribution and appropriate package manager automatically
- Checks for missing core tools (`i2cdetect`, `decode-dimms`, `dmidecode`)
- Checks for optional Python packages (`textual`, `linkify-it-py`)
- In interactive mode, asks permission before installing anything
- Constructs and executes correct installation commands for each distribution
- Never installs packages without explicit user approval

### TUI Implementation

The Textual-based TUI provides an interactive interface with several advanced features:

**Widget Architecture:**
- `DataTable`: DIMM list with sortable columns and keyboard navigation
- `RichLog`: Enhanced text panes supporting line selection and copying
- `Tabs`: Switch between Summary and Full views
- `CommandPalette`: Theme switching and future extensibility

**Key Features:**
- **Dual Theme Methods**: Both Ctrl+T toggle and Ctrl+P command palette
- **Focus Management**: Tab key switches between DIMM list and detail panes
- **Persistent State**: Active tab and theme preferences saved automatically
- **Rich Text Support**: Full Rich markup for formatted output
- **Keyboard Navigation**: Vim-style keys (j/k) and arrow keys

**Enhanced TUI Widgets:**
Recent enhancements replaced `Static` widgets with `RichLog` to support:
- Line-by-line keyboard navigation within detail panes
- Mouse text selection for copying to clipboard
- Visual focus indicators
- Improved scrolling performance

### Heuristic Database

The `die_database.json` contains prioritized rules for DRAM die identification:

**Rule Structure:**
```json
{
  "priority": 100,
  "die_type": "Samsung B-die",
  "generation": "DDR4",
  "manufacturer": "corsair",
  "part_number_contains": "CMK",
  "timings_xmp": "3200-16-18-18"
}
```

**Matching Logic:**
- Rules evaluated in priority order (highest first)
- All constraints must match (logical AND)
- Supports substring, exact, and prefix matching
- Handles sticker codes and IC part numbers for enhanced detection

### Interactive Features

**Lootbox/Sticker Prompts:**
In interactive mode, RamSleuth can prompt for additional information to improve detection accuracy:

- **Corsair**: "Ver X.XX" version codes from module labels
- **G.Skill**: Small alphanumeric sticker codes on heatspreaders
- **Crucial**: Suffix codes like ".M8FE1" from BL2K16G36C16U4B kits
- **SK Hynix**: IC part numbers from DDR5 DRAM packages

These prompts only appear in interactive TUI mode and are never shown in non-interactive modes (`--summary`, `--full`, `--json`).

### Debug Mode

Enable debug logging to troubleshoot issues:

```bash
sudo python ramsleuth.py --debug
```

Debug output includes:
- Configuration file operations and path resolution
- Hardware discovery details (SMBus scanning, device registration)
- Parser decision logic and intermediate data
- Theme change events and state management
- Dependency detection and installation steps

### Test Mode

Use test data for validation without hardware:

```bash
python ramsleuth.py --test-data
```

This mode uses the included `test_data.txt` fixture to demonstrate parsing and heuristic matching without requiring actual hardware access.

### Development

**Setup:**
```bash
python -m venv .venv
. .venv/bin/activate
pip install pytest textual
```

**Run Tests:**
```bash
PYTHONPATH=. pytest -q
```

**Test Coverage:**
- `test_parse_output.py`: Parser validation with side-by-side fixtures
- `test_RamSleuth_DB_is_match.py`: Heuristic matching logic
- `test_settings_service.py`: Configuration management
- `test_dependency_engine.py`: Dependency detection across distributions
- `test_command_palette.py`: TUI command palette functionality
- `test_theme_persistence.py`: Theme saving and loading

### Safety and Security

**Design Principles:**
- **Read-Only Operation**: Never modifies hardware or firmware
- **Best-Effort Registration**: SPD EEPROM registration via sysfs is non-fatal
- **Explicit User Consent**: No automatic package installation without permission
- **Input Validation**: All user input sanitized to prevent injection
- **Error Isolation**: Failures in one module don't crash the entire application
- **Clear Error Messages**: Human-readable errors with actionable guidance

**Sysfs Registration:**
When run as root, RamSleuth may attempt to register SPD EEPROM devices via `/sys/bus/i2c/devices/i2c-*/new_device`. These operations are:
- Best-effort only (failures don't stop execution)
- Non-destructive (no data modification)
- Debug-logged only (not shown to users unless `--debug` is used)
- Appropriate for DDR4/DDR5 SPD EEPROMs using the `ee1004` driver

### Exit Codes

RamSleuth uses specific exit codes for different scenarios:
- `0`: Success
- `1`: Insufficient privileges (not root)
- `4`: Database error (missing or invalid `die_database.json`)
- `5`: Dependency installation failure
- `6`: No SMBus detected in non-interactive mode
- `8`: Decoder execution failure or test data not found

---

## Feedback and Contributions

I welcome feedback, suggestions, and contributions from the community:

- **Questions or Issues**: Open an issue on the repository
- **Feature Requests**: Share your ideas for improvements
- **Database Contributions**: Help expand the die detection database
- **Code Contributions**: Submit pull requests for bug fixes or enhancements
- **Documentation**: Help improve documentation and examples

If RamSleuth has been helpful for your memory analysis needs, please consider starring the repository to help others discover it.

### Contributing Guidelines

- Keep `ramsleuth.py` as the orchestrator (environment checks, I/O, CLI/TUI)
- Keep `RamSleuth_DB.py` pure (no printing, no exits, deterministic only)
- Include tests for parsing changes in `tests/test_parse_output.py`
- Include tests for heuristic changes in `tests/test_RamSleuth_DB_is_match.py`
- Follow existing patterns and maintain non-interactive compatibility
- Never implement automatic package installation without user approval

## Support the Project

- [GitHub Sponsors](https://github.com/sponsors/MadGoatHaz)
- [PayPal](https://www.paypal.com/paypalme/garretthazlett)

Donations support development. If you donate to the app, any feature requests you have will be pushed to the top of the request list based upon the donation amount.

---

## License

Refer to the LICENSE file in the repository for licensing information. External tools (`decode-dimms`, `i2c-tools`, `dmidecode`) are separate projects with their own licenses.
